An American flag adorns the side of a snow-covered barn as a snowy and freezing cold weather system passes through Casey, Iowa © Joe Raedle/Getty Images
Letter: Don’t be surprised if Iowan voters reject woke agenda on x (opens in a new window)
Letter: Don’t be surprised if Iowan voters reject woke agenda on facebook (opens in a new window)
Letter: Don’t be surprised if Iowan voters reject woke agenda on linkedin (opens in a new window)

Share
Save

Pro Features Configuration
current progress 0%
JANUARY 16 2024
3
Print this page
Regarding Gideon Rachman’s column “Why I still believe in America” (Opinion, January 9), Donald Trump’s crusade of retribution and revenge is ultimately supported by American citizens who fear the left.

If Trump manages to be re-elected, it will be largely in reaction to the cultural inroads made by the “woke” or progressive agenda under President Joe Biden. And, from all appearances, the progressives are fine with this. They realise that if you only achieve 20 per cent of your goal, it still advances the ball that much closer towards the goalpost.

Progressives play the long game. Eventually, the electorate becomes disgusted with conservative shenanigans and swings the election pendulum back to the left. So, little by little, progressives win; it just may take longer than they wish. However, do not be surprised when the Iowan voters in this week’s Republican caucus react negatively to having “enlightened” ideals crammed down their throat.

Ted Gaffney
Waterford, CT, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2024. All rights reserved.
Reuse this content(opens in new window)CommentsJump to comments section
Comments


Related to your selection

No text highlighted. Please highlight some article text to see related articles here.

FT Professional feature
Related articles widget status

Useful links
Support
View Site Tips
Help Centre
Contact Us
About Us
Accessibility
myFT Tour
Careers
Legal & Privacy
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Manage Cookies
Copyright
Slavery Statement & Policies
Services
Share News Tips Securely
Individual Subscriptions
Professional Subscriptions
Republishing
Executive Job Search
Advertise with the FT
Follow the FT on X
FT Channels
FT Schools
Tools
Portfolio
FT App
FT Digital Edition
FT Edit
Alerts Hub
Business School Rankings
Subscription Manager
News feed
Newsletters
Currency Converter
Community & Events
FT Community
FT Live Events
FT Forums
Board Director Programme
More from the FT Group
Markets data delayed by at least 15 minutes. © THE FINANCIAL TIMES LTD 2024. FT and ‘Financial Times’ are trademarks of The Financial Times Ltd.
The Financial Times and its journalism are subject to a self-regulation regime under the FT Editorial Code of Practice.

