Study casts doubt on ‘wokeness’ of US university courses
Analysis contradicts conservative claims that critical race theory has overtaken American campuses

Campuses such as UC Berkeley have become battlegrounds in America’s culture wars © Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
Study casts doubt on ‘wokeness’ of US university courses on x (opens in a new window)
Study casts doubt on ‘wokeness’ of US university courses on facebook (opens in a new window)
Study casts doubt on ‘wokeness’ of US university courses on linkedin (opens in a new window)

Share
Save

Pro Features Configuration
current progress 34%
Andrew Jack in New YorkMAY 13 2024
79
Print this page
Fewer than one in 1,000 US university courses include references to critical race theory or other so-called “woke” topics that have become flashpoints in the country’s culture wars, according to the most detailed analysis of syllabuses.

A study of 5.6mn courses at nearly 4,000 higher education institutions by Open Syllabus, a non-profit group, shows just 0.08 per cent mention critical race theory (CRT), structural racism, systemic racism or diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI). The share is also very low for other sensitive topics including transgender issues, as well as for related textbooks.

The figures cast doubt on the intensifying “anti-woke” criticism of US education by right-wing Republicans and high-profile business people, including most recently Ken Griffin, founder of the hedge fund Citadel, who paused donations to his alma mater Harvard in January.

He told the FT last week that “the narrative on some of our college campuses has devolved to the level that the system is rigged and unfair, and that America is plagued by systemic racism and systemic injustice”.

However, Open Syllabus data suggests even on more elite four-year bachelor’s and master’s degrees, only 0.12 per cent of courses mention DEI or systematic racism. Among publicly available Harvard syllabuses, just 0.37 per cent mentioned structural racism and 0.32 per cent at Columbia.  

Joe Karaganis, founder of Open Syllabus, said that most university curriculums evolved very slowly and “our data suggests that it is, over the short and medium term at least, pretty insensitive to political and cultural change”.

The top 10 most frequently cited works on US university reading lists are books on mathematics, anatomy and writing, along with Plato, Karl Marx and Shakespeare.

Kant and Foucault, the social theorist, also feature frequently among four-year colleges, and Freud among the leading research universities. Richard Delgado, a seminal author on CRT, is referenced just 126 times.

The Open Syllabus analysis is not comprehensive, but it collects details of all publicly available information from US universities, offering an extensive snapshot of courses and books assigned on reading lists to the country’s 19mn college students.

Its calculations suggest only a small fraction of courses reference the terms that have come under recent political scrutiny, and may overestimate their role because they count courses that may be critically examining the ideas.

CRT is mentioned more frequently in some individual courses across US universities, rising to 0.9 per cent in sociology. However, the vast majority of US undergraduates major in other topics. Of the 3.1mn who received degrees in 2020-2021, business, health and engineering dominated, with just 8 per cent taking sociology.

Donors and a number of US politicians have focused their recent criticism on elite US universities, exploiting frustration among many middle-class families over the rising costs of tuition.

Their criticisms have not been limited to course content. They also question the growth of a DEI bureaucracy of officials and administrators, compliance rules and faculty appointments and promotions, which they suggest have not always been based on merit.

The controversy over free speech on campuses has been inflamed by pro-Palestinian protests at universities in recent weeks, which have led administrators to take disciplinary action and call in police to break up demonstrations.

Event details and information
Future of Asset Management North America
New York, US & Online

25 September - 26 September 2024

New models for the next age of fund management

Register now
Presented byFT Live

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2024. All rights reserved.
Reuse this content(opens in new window)CommentsJump to comments section
Latest on Education
Education
Councils ‘struggle to cope’ with rising cost of special educational needs
 NEW

UK economy
Revive Oxford-Cambridge high-tech growth plan, urge business and university leaders

Work Watch
US graduates face cut-throat job market as companies scrap internships

Management
Crisis simulations force executives to make better decisions under stress

Education
How rich donors are targeting US medical school tuition

Private equity
Private equity groups battle it out for $15bn schools group

Soumaya Keynes
Even a PhD isn’t enough to erase the effects of class

Follow the topics in this article
US race relations
Add to myFT
Education
Add to myFT
US
Add to myFT
Andrew Jack
Add to myFT
Comments


Related to your selection

No text highlighted. Please highlight some article text to see related articles here.

FT Professional feature
Related articles widget status

Useful links
Support
View Site Tips
Help Centre
Contact Us
About Us
Accessibility
myFT Tour
Careers
Legal & Privacy
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Manage Cookies
Copyright
Slavery Statement & Policies
Services
Share News Tips Securely
Individual Subscriptions
Professional Subscriptions
Republishing
Executive Job Search
Advertise with the FT
Follow the FT on X
FT Channels
FT Schools
Tools
Portfolio
FT App
FT Digital Edition
FT Edit
Alerts Hub
Business School Rankings
Subscription Manager
News feed
Newsletters
Currency Converter
Community & Events
FT Community
FT Live Events
FT Forums
Board Director Programme
More from the FT Group
Markets data delayed by at least 15 minutes. © THE FINANCIAL TIMES LTD 2024. FT and ‘Financial Times’ are trademarks of The Financial Times Ltd.
The Financial Times and its journalism are subject to a self-regulation regime under the FT Editorial Code of Practice.

