Academics are boycotting a leading gender studies journal owned by New York-listed publisher Wiley after its editors and policies were changed in what they characterise as an “anti-woke” drive against radical views in the pursuit of profits.

Nearly 500 advisers, reviewers, contributors and readers have written resignation letters to Wiley in protest at the “mainstreaming” of the Gender, Work and Organization journal, claiming it has changed its aims, including the removal of references to queer theory on its website.

The signatories to two documents circulated this week also criticised the appointment as editors-in-chief of “business academics with expertise in marketing and entrepreneurship [who do not reflect] the breadth of gender and feminist research of the journal”.

“This is some kind of anti-woke backlash in the form of removing what would have been seen as radical aspects of the journal,” said Professor Carl Rhodes, dean of the business school at the University of Technology Sydney and a former associate editor of the journal.

The move to call out Wiley’s “marginalising practices” highlights the tensions in academic publishing, with authors under fierce pressure to publish and to peer-review others’ contributions for free.

Publishers also face growing demands to increase subscription revenues at a time of cuts to university research budgets and a shift to open-access platforms. Intensifying “culture wars” between opposing ideologies also make some journals a target for criticism.

One of the “big five” academic publishers alongside Elsevier, SAGE, Springer Nature and Taylor & Francis, Wiley’s research publishing division reported revenues of $659mn in the nine months to January 31, down 4 per cent compared with the same period a year earlier. It does not provide detailed figures on individual journals.

The group boycotting the journal, which was established in 1994, wrote: “We no longer identify with the aims, scope or undemocratic practices and processes underpinning the journal, and we have no trust that the current governance is aligned with the values of our inclusive, feminist community. It added that Wiley was “sabotaging world-class scholarship”.

The 467 signatories said the process to appoint the new editors was “not appropriate, consistent, transparent or inclusive”, while it said former associate editors had received papers “to process that do not fit” with its critical gender and feminist roots.

The latest issue contains articles on “gendered executive headhunting with Chinese characteristics”, “the underrepresentation of women in physics compared to biology” and the “foodwork of Brexit-prepping mothers”.

Professor Alison Pullen at Macquarie University, a former co-editor and signatory to the document, said the publisher’s actions signified that it “no longer needs or wants expert academics in the field because that limits their capacity to publish popular accounts that can increase their revenue”.

Recommended

Data PointsJohn Burn-Murdoch
A new global gender divide is emerging

Disputes between academics and publishers have increased in recent years, with editors of more than 30 academic journals resigning since 2015 and eight in 2023 alone, according to the blog Retraction Watch, in spats over fees charged and editorial disagreements.

Professor Melissa Tyler, whose research at the UK’s Essex university focuses on gender and work, said: “This is absolutely an attack on academic freedom and integrity . . . Our social and cultural landscapes are so awash with fear-fuelled hate that these kinds of critical spaces are vital to academic freedom and expression.”

Wiley said: “Our job as publisher is to ensure that our journals meet the evolving needs of the community, provide insights into emerging areas of study, and include various areas of scholarship and expertise.”

“The topics covered by Gender, Work & Organization are critically important and we continue to invest resources in this impactful journal. We have not suggested any changes to the scope of this journal, nor to the quality of research that it aims to publish.”

This article has been amended to clarify the claims of the protesting academics

Event details and information
Business of Entertainment Summit
West Hollywood, US & Online

19 September - 21 September 2024

Capitalizing on Disruption

Register now
Presented byFT Live

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2024. All rights reserved.
Reuse this content(opens in new window)CommentsJump to comments section
Related equities

Last 30 days change


John Wiley & Sons Inc
Equity | WLY:NYQ +17.55%
Sage Group PLC
Equity | SGE:LSE −0.87%
Was this data useful?
Yes
No
FT Professional feature
Source: LSEG via markets.ft.com

Latest on Gender politics
Inside BusinessAmy Kazmin
Italy is tying itself in knots over business gender quotas

US Secret Service
Secret Service target of misogynistic backlash after Trump shooting

ReviewFilm
Orlando: My Political Biography — entertaining manifesto film channels Virginia Woolf

Gender politics
Is economics a losing game for women?

Special ReportEurope’s Leading Patent Law Firms
Studies highlight gender and race-based gaps in patent applications

UK general election 2024
Tories pledge to amend Equality Act to define sex as ‘biological sex’

Nikki Shure
The truth about the confidence pay penalty

Follow the topics in this article
Gender politics
Add to myFT
Social affairs
Add to myFT
LGBT+
Add to myFT
Media
Added
John Wiley & Sons Inc
Add to myFT
Comments
Comments have not been enabled for this article.



Related to your selection

No text highlighted. Please highlight some article text to see related articles here.

FT Professional feature
Related articles widget status

Useful links
Support
View Site Tips
Help Centre
Contact Us
About Us
Accessibility
myFT Tour
Careers
Legal & Privacy
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Manage Cookies
Copyright
Slavery Statement & Policies
Services
Share News Tips Securely
Individual Subscriptions
Professional Subscriptions
Republishing
Executive Job Search
Advertise with the FT
Follow the FT on X
FT Channels
FT Schools
Tools
Portfolio
FT App
FT Digital Edition
FT Edit
Alerts Hub
Business School Rankings
Subscription Manager
News feed
Newsletters
Currency Converter
Community & Events
FT Community
FT Live Events
FT Forums
Board Director Programme
More from the FT Group
Markets data delayed by at least 15 minutes. © THE FINANCIAL TIMES LTD 2024. FT and ‘Financial Times’ are trademarks of The Financial Times Ltd.
The Financial Times and its journalism are subject to a self-regulation regime under the FT Editorial Code of Practice.

