Elon Musk's trans daughter hits back at dad in furious public rebuttal to claims of being 'tricked by woke mind virus'
​Vivian Jenna Wilson has hit back at her father's claims
Vivian Jenna Wilson has hit back at her father's claims Getty/Threads
George Bunn
By George Bunn
Published: 26/07/2024 - 15:01Updated: 26/07/2024 - 15:16

12
Comments
In her first interview, Vivian Jenna Wilson said that Musk was 'an absent father' who was cruel to her
The transgender daughter of Elon Musk has slammed her father, accusing him of cruelty.

Musk had said he was "tricked by woke mind virus" into authorising trans-related medical treatment for Vivian Jenna Wilson when she was 16.

On social media and in an interview posted online, the Tesla CEO said his child was "not a girl" and referred to Wilson by birth name, saying his son was "dead".


Now, Wilson has hit back at Musk's claims, saying the billionaire hadn’t been tricked and that, after initially having hesitated, he knew what he was doing when he agreed to the treatment, which required parental consent.

\u200bVivian Jenna Wilson has hit back at her father's claims
Vivian Jenna Wilson has hit back at her father's claimsGetty/Threads
Wilson told NBC News: "I think he was under the assumption that I wasn’t going to say anything and I would just let this go unchallenged...Which I’m not going to do, because if you’re going to lie about me, like, blatantly to an audience of millions, I’m not just gonna let that slide."

Wilson added that Musk was unsupportive, and was barely present in childhood.

The 20-year-old added: "He was cold...He’s very quick to anger. He is uncaring and narcissistic."

LATEST DEVELOPMENTS

Elon Musk declares his trans child is 'dead' after being killed by 'woke virus'
Elon Musk backs JK Rowling in transgender row as he labels author 'Absolutely right!'
Donald Trump delivers damning verdict on electric cars amid Elon Musk links
\u200b SpaceX's CEO Elon Musk
 SpaceX's CEO Elon MuskReuters
DON'T MISS
Amy Nickell-Turner NEWS
Amy Nickell-Turner blasts critics of 'harmless' Farage game
Sue Holderness CELEBRITY
Only Fools and Horses legend opens up on 'guilt' of show's negative impact: 'Affected people'
Carlos Alcaraz sets record straight after liking rude picture ahead of Paris OlympicsTENNIS
Alcaraz sets record straight after liking rude picture ahead of Paris Olympics
Wilson and their twin brother were born to Musk’s first wife, author Justine Musk. The couple divorced in 2008, and with the parents sharing custody between their homes in the Los Angeles area.

On social media, Musk said that Wilson was "born gay and slightly autistic" and that, at age four, fitted certain gay stereotypes, such as loving musicals and using the exclamation "fabulous!" to describe certain clothing. Wilson denied these claims, though admitted to acting stereotypically feminine in other ways as a child.

Writing on Threads, a rival social media site to Musk's X platform, Wilson wrote: "He doesn’t know what I was like as a child because he quite simply wasn’t there...And in the little time that he was I was relentlessly harassed for my femininity and queerness.

"I’ve been reduced to a happy little stereotype. I think that says a lot about how he views queer people and children in general."

\u200bGrimes has come to her defence
Grimes has come to her defenceGetty
MOST READ
Penny Lancaster, Alastair Stewart and Aiden Stewart CELEBRITY
Penny Lancaster beams with pride as she shares emotional milestone with son
LIV Golf star Bryson DeChambeau makes Kamala Harris offer after Donald Trump collaborationGOLF
LIV Golf star Bryson DeChambeau makes Harris offer after Trump collaboration
The Rolling Stones ditch iconic lyric on latest US tour in huge self-censor move after Trump shootingCELEBRITY
The Rolling Stones ditch iconic lyric on US tour in self-censor move after Trump shooting
Musk's ex-partner, experimental electronic musician Grimes, came to the defence of Wilson. She wrote on social media: "I love and am forever endlessly proud of Vivian."

Wilson also defended puberty blockers, saying the treatment was lifesaving for her and other transgender people, telling NBC News: "They save lives. Let’s not get that twisted. They definitely allowed me to thrive."

The 20-year-old believes the requirements to obtain such treatments remain onerous, with teenagers pressured to say they’re at extreme risk of self-harm before they’ll be approved.

NewsElon MuskUSUS News
You may like
Live


ABOUT US
Our Editorial Charter
Our Investors
Work for Us
Advertising
Contact Us
DISCOVER
News Alerts
Sitemaps
RSS Feeds
APPS & PRODUCTS
Apple Apps
Android Apps
Fire TV
Roku
TV Apps
Radio
TERMS
Cookies Policy
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Community Rules
Membership Rules
Radio Advertising
SOCIALS
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. © 2024 GBNEWS.