
	BlackRock chief executive Larry Fink has been singled out as part of a backlash against the money manager’s use of investing based on environmental, social and governance factors © Sean Gallup/Getty Images
BlackRock steps up security for Larry Fink after ‘anti-woke’ backlash on x (opens in a new window)
BlackRock steps up security for Larry Fink after ‘anti-woke’ backlash on facebook (opens in a new window)
BlackRock steps up security for Larry Fink after ‘anti-woke’ backlash on linkedin (opens in a new window)

Share
Save

Pro Features Configuration
current progress 0%
Louis Ashworth in London and Brooke Masters in New YorkAPRIL 21 2024
464
Print this page
BlackRock more than tripled its spending on home security for Larry Fink last year, after the asset manager’s chair and chief executive became a target for “anti-woke” activists and conspiracy theorists.

The $10.5tn money manager paid $563,513 to “upgrade the home security systems” at Fink’s residences during 2023, on top of $216,837 of protection by bodyguards, according to BlackRock’s disclosure of executive remuneration in its proxy filed earlier this month.

The 71-year-old head of the world’s largest money manager has been singled out by conservatives and fringe groups as part of a backlash against BlackRock’s use of investing based on environmental, social and governance factors.

BlackRock was repeatedly referenced in the primary season election debates between Donald Trump’s rivals for the Republican party’s presidential nomination. Vivek Ramaswamy, one of the candidates, called Fink “the king of the woke industrial complex [and] the ESG movement”.

Fink said at the time that the debate references were “a sad commentary on the state of American politics”. BlackRock’s offices have also been targeted for periodic protests by climate activists who say it has not done enough to promote decarbonisation.

In 2022, the asset manager set up personal security plans for Fink and BlackRock president Robert Kapito, following a security report by a security group. The company said the security services were “in the interests of the company and its shareholders”, owing to the “critical value” the pair provided.

BlackRock is not the only US company to step up security spending on its chief executive.

Disney chief Bob Iger’s 2023 pay package included $1.2mn in costs for “security services and equipment”, the entertainment group said in a filing earlier this year. That was an increase from $830,437 the previous year. Iger returned to the chief executive role in November 2022 at a time when Disney was being heavily criticised for being “too woke”.

Pharmaceuticals groups Pfizer and Moderna, which have both faced criticism from fringe groups over their Covid-19 vaccines, also spent heavily on security for their CEOs last year. Moderna paid $1,053,767 for security services to Stéphane Bancel, after not disclosing any security payments for him the previous year.

Pfizer paid for $789,495 of “additional security protection” for its chief executive Albert Bourla, citing “heightened security risks including threats made against our executives”. It had spent $800,687 in 2022. The group said the payments covered “appropriate home security systems”, as well as security consultancy and other services.

JPMorgan chief executive Jamie Dimon received $150,645 “for the cost of residential, personal travel, and related security” during 2023, a nearly fourfold increase on the previous year. The lender said the latest figure included “one-time expenditures related to system installations and upgrades”.

David Solomon, chief executive of Goldman Sachs, received $29,990 for personal security during the year, down from $31,610 in 2022.

Electric-car maker Tesla registered expenses of about $2.4mn for its chief executive Elon Musk in 2023, with a further $500,000 spent in the first two months of this year.


Business School Insider, premium, MondaysPremium
Campus news, management research and business education trends

Unsubscribed from Business School Insider newsletterNewsletter sign up to Business School Insider
Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2024. All rights reserved.
Reuse this content(opens in new window)CommentsJump to comments section
Related equities

Last 30 days change


BlackRock Inc
Equity | BLK:NYQ +8.45%
Moderna Inc
Equity | MRNA:NSQ −0.85%
Pfizer Inc
Equity | PFE:NYQ +12.05%
Was this data useful?
Yes
No
FT Professional feature
Source: LSEG via markets.ft.com

Latest on BlackRock Inc
Exchange traded funds
BlackRock hit by $17bn Asia-Pacific outflows in first half

Exchange traded funds
BlackRock forecasts active ETF assets will hit $4tn by 2030

BlackRock Inc
BlackRock’s Fink highlights ‘barbell effect’ as investors return to fixed income

Exchange traded funds
BlackRock’s private market ETF ambitions draw scepticism

Envestnet Inc
Wall Street groups to buy software maker Envestnet for $4.5bn

Private equity
BlackRock among blue-chip investors as Melrose corporate raiders return

ESG investing
Proxy season results show support for ESG efforts continues to ebb

Follow the topics in this article
US & Canadian companies
Add to myFT
Financial services
Added
ESG investing
Add to myFT
BlackRock Inc
Add to myFT
Larry Fink
Add to myFT
Comments


Related to your selection

No text highlighted. Please highlight some article text to see related articles here.

FT Professional feature
Related articles widget status

Useful links
Support
View Site Tips
Help Centre
Contact Us
About Us
Accessibility
myFT Tour
Careers
Legal & Privacy
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Manage Cookies
Copyright
Slavery Statement & Policies
Services
Share News Tips Securely
Individual Subscriptions
Professional Subscriptions
Republishing
Executive Job Search
Advertise with the FT
Follow the FT on X
FT Channels
FT Schools
Tools
Portfolio
FT App
FT Digital Edition
FT Edit
Alerts Hub
Business School Rankings
Subscription Manager
News feed
Newsletters
Currency Converter
Community & Events
FT Community
FT Live Events
FT Forums
Board Director Programme
More from the FT Group
Markets data delayed by at least 15 minutes. © THE FINANCIAL TIMES LTD 2024. FT and ‘Financial Times’ are trademarks of The Financial Times Ltd.
The Financial Times and its journalism are subject to a self-regulation regime under the FT Editorial Code of Practice.

