
	
Bud Light brewer Anheuser-Busch faced a boycott this year after it sponsored transgender influencer Dylan Mulvaney © Getty Images
Was this the year of peak woke? on x (opens in a new window)
Was this the year of peak woke? on facebook (opens in a new window)
Was this the year of peak woke? on linkedin (opens in a new window)

Share
Save

Pro Features Configuration
current progress 0%
Joshua ChaffinDECEMBER 29 2023
Print this page
Earlier in December, Barbara Furlow-Smiles pleaded guilty to criminal charges that she embezzled some $4mn from Facebook while serving as a top diversity executive at the tech company. That tawdry episode seemed a fitting end to the year the woke wave crested. In 2024, it is likely to recede.

The term “woke”, of course, has been twisted to the point of deformity. It can mean an awareness of one’s surroundings, usually related to racial and social injustice. Or, it can be stretched to cover such things as critical race theory and identity politics, and a conviction that most problems are systemic and must be addressed as such. At its most pejorative, it tends to denote a censorious and performative progressive tribe.

As a middle-aged, white-ish man, I may not be best placed to pronounce the decline of woke. Still, I can see its problems mounting.

In the corporate world, leaders have come to see that being woke is not necessarily profitable. Disney chief executive Bob Iger recently suggested that its creatives’ insistence on shoehorning progressive social messages into its films helped to account for their poor box office performance. “We have to entertain first,” said Iger. “It’s not about messages.”

Bud Light has been made to crawl since its move earlier this year to partner with Dylan Mulvaney, a transgender influencer, prompted a conservative boycott led by musician Kid Rock that knocked it from its perch as America’s top-selling beer. (How Bud Light could be the top-selling beer anywhere is a subject for a separate column.)

Its parent company made amends by launching a bro-ey ad campaign featuring professional footballers and paying up to again become the official sponsor of the Ultimate Fighting Championship. Rock seems satisfied and has been spied necking Bud Light again.

In a national election year, I expect Joe Biden’s handlers will also hope to muzzle woke voices within his party

My FT colleague Taylor Nicole Rogers tells me that diversity, equity and inclusion executives at big companies are disheartened that the grand promises their employers made in the fevered days after George Floyd’s murder in 2020 are no longer a priority.

Attacking woke is not foolproof. Ron DeSantis, the Florida governor, has not reaped the expected dividends in his campaign for the Republican nomination by promising to bury wokeness. But perhaps that is because it is now de rigueur on the right to be an enemy of wokeness. In a national election year, I expect Joe Biden’s handlers will also hope to muzzle woke voices within his party.

For me, what truly shattered the woke movement was Hamas’s October 7 attack on Israel — and the astonishing images of students and activists either justifying the slaughter of innocents or finding ways to condemn Israel before it had yet dropped a bomb. (It has since dropped many, with the Gaza death toll reaching 20,000, according to officials in the Hamas-run territory.) The problem, say critics, is that the woke conception of the world — obsessed by systems and identity — mishandles Jews and Israelis. It tends to cast them as wealthy “white oppressors”, and so cannot see them as victims.

In my ultra-progressive suburb, where people plant signs on their front lawns advertising the many hatreds they oppose, fellow Jews have been startled by the lack of solidarity from groups they have supported in the past. To them, and now me, the woke banner we marched under a few years ago feels hollow, even hypocritical.

Then came the now infamous congressional testimony of the presidents of Harvard, the University of Pennsylvania and MIT, in which they struggled to answer whether calls for the genocide of Jews violated their codes of conduct. Their hedging was a revelatory moment for an idea undone by its adherents’ excesses and clumsy application.

Sometimes eras collapse in one horrific gasp. A friend reminded me of this passage from Joan Didion’s essay “The White Album”, in reference to the Manson murders: “Many people I know in Los Angeles believe that the Sixties ended abruptly on August 9, 1969, ended at the exact moment when word of the murders on Cielo Drive traveled like brushfire through the community, and in a sense this is true. The tension broke that day. The paranoia was fulfilled.”

It is too soon to say whether the woke era ended on October 7 or merely reached a crossroads. But the racism it called out, and its poisonous legacy, are still haunting us. So too sexism and myriad other social injustices. We will have to find new ways to think about and confront them.

Joshua Chaffin is the FT’s New York correspondent

Follow @FTWeekend on Instagram and X, and subscribe to our podcast Life and Art wherever you listen

Event details and information
FTWeekend Festival
London, UK

07 September 2024

Where the FT Weekend paper comes to life

Register now
Presented byFT Live

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2024. All rights reserved.
Reuse this content(opens in new window)CommentsJump to comments section
Related equities

Last 30 days change


Meta Platforms Inc
Equity | META:NSQ −8.79%
Walt Disney Co
Equity | DIS:NYQ −11.68%
Was this data useful?
Yes
No
FT Professional feature
Source: LSEG via markets.ft.com

Latest on Life & Arts
InterviewLunch with the FT
Evangelical leader Franklin Graham: ‘Americans realise Trump is not pastor-in-chief’
 UPDATED

Robin Lane Fox
Don’t miss one of my favourite flowery paradises
 NEW

FT SeriesLet the games begin!
Can you solve the mysterious murder at the manor?
1 HOUR AGO
Life & Arts
Can you solve the mysterious murder at the manor? — solutions
1 HOUR AGO
FT SeriesLet the games begin!
Among the Stars: a role-playing game of imagination and daring
1 HOUR AGO
ReviewTheatre
Fangirls, Lyric Hammersmith — fandom and fantasy in a fantastic new musical
1 HOUR AGO

FT SeriesLet the games begin!
Ariston’s Map: a role-playing game for the intrepid traveller
1 HOUR AGO
Follow the topics in this article
Joshua Chaffin
Add to myFT
Life & Arts
Add to myFT
US politics & policy
Add to myFT
Comments
Comments have not been enabled for this article.



Related to your selection

No text highlighted. Please highlight some article text to see related articles here.

FT Professional feature
Related articles widget status

Useful links
Support
View Site Tips
Help Centre
Contact Us
About Us
Accessibility
myFT Tour
Careers
Legal & Privacy
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Manage Cookies
Copyright
Slavery Statement & Policies
Services
Share News Tips Securely
Individual Subscriptions
Professional Subscriptions
Republishing
Executive Job Search
Advertise with the FT
Follow the FT on X
FT Channels
FT Schools
Tools
Portfolio
FT App
FT Digital Edition
FT Edit
Alerts Hub
Business School Rankings
Subscription Manager
News feed
Newsletters
Currency Converter
Community & Events
FT Community
FT Live Events
FT Forums
Board Director Programme
More from the FT Group
Markets data delayed by at least 15 minutes. © THE FINANCIAL TIMES LTD 2024. FT and ‘Financial Times’ are trademarks of The Financial Times Ltd.
The Financial Times and its journalism are subject to a self-regulation regime under the FT Editorial Code of Practice.

