
The latest episode of the long-running drama prompted a flood of complaints about the show
Midsomer Murders recently made a return to screens following a three-month hiatus mid-series, but Tuesday's episode of the ITV drama appeared to irk a number of viewers at home.

After last week's instalment was deemed "boring," and plot holes were pointed out, the latest episode was slammed by some as being "lazy" as it became obvious to eagle-eyed fans certain actors had been "recycled".

The synopsis for the latest episode of the cosy crime drama read: "An organic bakery in the newly restored Larkton's Mill causes resentment in Lower Blissingham, with many of the old village businesses struggling, traffic has increased and rumours that owners Tom and Chrissie Larkton are planning to expand.


"The complaints are not taken too seriously until several people are dosed with a dangerous hallucinogenic, with Barnaby and Winter called in to investigate, and the situation escalates when a farmer is murdered."

While the detective series has built a strong following after making its debut back in 1997, remaining fans seem to think the programme has gone stale and has resorted to low quality storylines and re-used cast members.

As well as returning members of the cast reappearing, Tuesday's episode came under fire for a change to the format as the show's "murder" didn't take place until deep into the instalment.

Midsomer MurdersITV detective series Midsomer Murders has been slammed online following the latest episodeITV
As the latest instalment aired, fans swarmed X with complaints, with one person writing: "No bushes! No gloves. No owls. No foxes! No blunt force trauma. This ain’t no #MidsomerMurders."

"Think #midsomermurders need to call it a day now. The writing and acting on this show is terrible. It’s become a parody of itself. When you focus on I&D rather than talent this is what you get OTT & offensive rational stereotype charters," another slammed.

Others questioned why nobody had died until the last minute when the show's traditional format sees detectives tackling a murder just minutes in as they raged: "This is a rarity! Half an hour in & no-one has died! #midsommermurders."

"Credits have rolled and no one’s dead yet?! #MidsomerMurders," another noted.

Midsomer MurdersLong-running ITV drama Midsomer Murders has been deemed "boring" and "lazy"ITV
DON'T MISS
Zara Tindall
Zara Tindall suffers blow as royal faces major career setback
Pensioner looks at financesMEMBERSHIP
Simple Assessment explained as tens of thousands of pensioners face HMRC tax demand
Amy Nickell-Turner 
Amy Nickell-Turner blasts critics of 'harmless' Farage game
"Well that was a weird 'meh' episode #MidsomerMurders," someone else summarised.

"Huh Laila Rouass who's playing Sarah's pal tonight was the killer the last time she was in #MidsomerMurders. recycling cast just strikes me as lazy casting," another complained about the casting. (sic)

The programme was also slammed for seemingly "becoming woke," with viewers unimpressed by changes made.

Following the first episode of the series, which aired in April, speculation about the show potenitally being axed was sparked following the negative feedback.

MOST READ
Ellie Warner 
Gogglebox star flooded with support as they issue urgent plea after 'bizarre burglary'
Penny Lancaster, Alastair Stewart and Aiden Stewart 
Penny Lancaster beams with pride as she shares emotional milestone with son
Strictly Come Dancing 2024: Rumoured line-up 
BBC Strictly line-up 2024: All the rumoured contestants as Nick Knowles 'signs up'
LATEST DEVELOPMENTS:

Anthea Turner, 64, issues urgent health plea as she opens up on tough condition: 'Everyone should find out'
Celine Dion, 56, set for eye-watering payday with Paris Olympics gig amid stiff-person syndrome battle
BBC Strictly stars suffering 'untold stress and anguish' after feeling 'hung out to dry' by celebrities

According to betting company betideas.com, odds for the drama to end soon are at 8/11, which isn't good news for fans.

Lee Astley, spokesperson for the company, stated: "The new series of Midsomer Murders was met with a mixed reception and with no confirmed date for its second episode, it appears ITV could be losing patience with its long-running drama.

"Series 23, whenever it does resume, could well be the last one to hit our screens, with the show now just 8/11 to be canned after the latest season is aired.

"Meanwhile, ITV bosses could look to keep hold of the show but instead give it a major revamp to appeal to new viewers, including a new cast, with Midsomer Murders 6/4 to receive a significant rebrand."

CelebrityITVTV
You may like
Live

ABOUT US
Our Editorial Charter
Our Investors
Work for Us
Advertising
Contact Us
DISCOVER
News Alerts
Sitemaps
RSS Feeds
APPS & PRODUCTS
Apple Apps
Android Apps
Fire TV
Roku
TV Apps
Radio
TERMS
Cookies Policy
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Community Rules
Membership Rules
Radio Advertising
SOCIALS
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. © 2024 GBNEWS.